- In prepare to my online studies I bought a Tolino Shine 4 to be able to access my PDFs on the road without having to bring my laptop all the time. Like all modern e-readers you have dictionaries on board as well as the functionality to highlight text and add notes. You also have access to the Onleihe system, which is a network used by libraries to provide their content online for webreaders and Onleihe-capable devices like the Tolino e-reader family.
- Unfortunately, it does not have the capability to connect to tools like Readwise or it's OpenSource alternative Omnivore, to automatically export highlights and notes to a server. It also does not sync notes and highlights to the Tolino cloud. Given one of these things, it'd have been either easy to integrate your notes from the Tolino into LogSeq or to create a simple program to sync changes from the reader to your local LogSeq collection.
- But despite that, it's quite easy to get access to the notes and highlights. They are not stored in a database or similar storage format, but in a simple txt file. It's syntax is argueable, but it's relatively easy to parse the content and create some Markdown from it to pass to LogSeq.
- That's what the following script is for, which you can access [here](https://github.com/js-on/tolino2logseq). Currently, it's set up for Tolinos installed in German, but the changes should only affect specific keywords in the parsing like "Notiz" or "Markierung". To use it, download the Python script to your LogSeq folder and navigate your terminal into that folder as well. For being able to successfully execute the script, connect your Tolino via USB and mount it. You can then run the script `./tolino2logseq.py`. If it cannot find your Tolino, it'll stop execution. If it found one, it'll parse the todo.txt file stored within the internal storage of the Tolino and create a Markdown file "TolinoHighlights.md" in the pages directory. LogSeq might not recognize the page at first, just create a new one with the name. Hit save and it'll ask you which version (the just created one or the one with the actual content) you want to keep. Choose the second one and you're good to go.
- Thanks to LogSeq's powerful features, you can then reference each highlight / note block everywhere you want or just embed it. Although this is a very hacky way and maybe there are cleaner ways like rooting one of the newer Tolinos and install the Readwise / Omnivore app alongside a more usable reading application, but for me, this is the way to go. At least for now. No need to bring the laptop everywhere, just put your PDFs as Epub onto your Tolino (otherwise highlighting won't work, even with text layered PDFs) and you're able to learn whilst being on the road, without having to keep your laptop and charging cable.
- Maybe someone else will find the script useful as well and fixes yet unknown issues. Let's see, whether this was only useful for me or also for others. Porting it to Windows would be one super useful collaboration to be honest.