- ### Lecture - From Terrorism to Cyberterrorism
	- **Introduction**: Internet technologies are playing a key role in the planning and execution of terrorist acts. This leads to more complexity when it comes to developing and implementing strategies to counter cyberterrorism. While there is a range of response and security strategies that have been developed to combat and deter cyberterrorism, the effective implementation of such strategies is challenging.
	- **From Terrorism to Cyberterrorism**:
	  Cyberterrorism is distinct from its traditional form as it requires the convergence of terrorism and cyberspace (*Arquilla & Ronfeldt, 2001, p. 241*). Key critical infrastructures, relying on the use of Internet technologies (such as electric power systems, water supply systems, air traffic systems or health care infrastructure) can be targeted by terrorist cyberattacks.
	  Cyberterrorism also includes physical attacks on IT systems (*Verton, 2003*), which can be a target and a weapon (*Conway, 2002*). However, Lachow (2009) argues cyberterrorism refers to the method of attack, rather than the target.
	  Furthermore, cyberterrorism is associated with cyberterror and tends to target large groups of people in order to cause panic and fear, at the same time drawing attention to a specific political and/or ideological agenda (*Holt et al., 2018*)
	- **Definitions of Cyberterrorism**
	- | **Author(s)** | **Definition** |
	  | Jarvis and Macdonald (2015) | "unlawful attacks perpetrated for political objectives to provoke fear, intimidate and/or coerce a target government or population, and cause or threaten to cause harm (e.g. sabotage)." |
	  | Theohay and Rollins (2015) | "the premeditated use of disruptive activities, or the threat thereof, against computers and/or networks, with the intention to cause harm or further social, ideological, religious, political or similar objectives, or to intimidate any person in furtherance of such objectives." |
	  | Marjie Britz (2010) | "the premeditated, methodological, ideologically motivated dissemination of information, facilitation of communication, or attack against physical target, digital information, computer systems, and/or computer programs which is intended to cause social, financial, physical, or psychological harm to non-combatant targets and audiences for the purpose of affecting ideological, political, or social change; or any utilization of digital communication or information which facilitates such actions directly or indirectly." |
	  | Moore (2015) | "Cyberterrorism, much like its physical-realm equivalent, has many definitions. The ((640d961e-06f4-48ca-925d-c9fa9ab2f6fa)) (CFAA) was modified by the ((640d9c93-b19c-4931-9fb6-1d29530a21a5)) to include a definition related to cyberterrorism: Any conduct that causes (or, in the case of an attempted offense, would, if completed, have caused) - (i) loss to one or more persons during any one-year period (and, for purposes of an investigation, prosecution, or other proceeding brought by the United States only, loss resulting from a related course of conduct affecting one or more other protected computers) aggregating at least $5,000 in value; (ii) the modification or impairment, or potential modification or impairment, of the medical examination, diagnosis, treatment, or care of one or more individuals; (iii) physical injury to any person; (iv) a threat to public health or safety; or (v) damage affecting a computer system used by or for a government entity in furtherance of the administration of justice, national defense, or national security." |
	  | Pollitt (1997) | "Cyberterrorism is the premeditated, politically motivated attack against information, computer systems, computer programs, and data which result in violence against non-combatant targets by subnational groups of clandestine agents." |
	  | Gordon and Ford (2003) | "Use of other factors and abilities of the virtual world... by the terrorist in order to complete his (physical) mission." |
	  | Denning (2000) | "Cyberterrorism is the convergence of terrorism and cyberspace. It is generally understood to mean unlawful attacks and threats of attack against computers, networks, and the information stored here in when done to intimidate or coerce a government or its people in furtherance of political or social objectives. Further, to qualify as cyberterrorism, an attack should result in violence against persons or property, or at least cause enough harm to generate fear. Attacks that lead to death or bodily injury, explosions, plane crashes, water contamination, or severe economic loss would be examples. Serious attacks against critical infrastructures could be acts of cyberterrorism, depending on their impact. Attacks that disrupt nonessential services or that are mainly a costly nuisance would not." |
	  | Wilson (2003) | "A criminal act perpetrated through computers resulting in violence, death and/or destruction, and creating terror for the purpose of coercing a government to change its policies." |
	  | The United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) | "The unlawful use of force or violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social objectives." |
- ### Cyberterrorism Typology
	- **Hybrid Cyberterrorism**
	  Hybrid cyberterrorism, which includes three main activities. propaganda, radicalisation and recruitment (e.g. recruit supporters and train new members). When it comes to propaganda terrorists use the surface web to disseminate threats and to counter media monopoly. For example, Al-Qaeda's 'Military Studies in the Jihad against the Tyrants' identified propaganda as a key strategy to pursue. In addition, Internet allowed non-state actors, such as ISIS, to produce and disseminate propaganda material.
	- **Pure Cyberterrorism**
	  Pure cyberterrorism, which covers attacks against computers, networks and the information stored therein. State and non-state actors use Internet to enable cybertattacks, ranging from denial of service to sabotage of industrial control systems. Critical infrastructures can be culnerable to such cyberattacks as they contain complex legacy systems that are arduous to replace or patch.
	- **Cyberterrorism, Cyberwarfare and Hacktivism**
	  Cyberterrorism might be confused with cyberwarfare and / or hacktivism. In some cases, the boundaries between these concepts are rather blurrend and it is challenging to distinguish cyberterrorism from other cyber threats.
	- Briefly, hacktivism is motivated by political, ideological and social goals but it does not focus on creating cyberterror. Cyberwarfare is more associated with nation states, where IT systems are the target of information warfare, while cyberterrorism can be committed by individuals and targets life through technology to promote political, religious or social reform
	- Discussing the differences between these cyber threats is beyond the scope of this module. the following sources provide interesting discussion around this debate and help to develop a better understanding of hacktivism.
		- Denning, D.E., 'Activism, Hacktivism, and Cyberterrorism: The Internet as a Tool for Influencing Foreign Policy' in Jon Arquila and David Ronfeldt (eds), *networks and Netwars: The Future of Terror, Crime, and Militancy* (RAND Corporation 2001)
		- Hampson, N., (2012) 'Hacktivism: A New Breed of Protest in a Networked World', *Boston College International & Comparative Law Review*.
		- Li, X. (2013) ‘Hacktivism and the First Amendment: Drawing the Line between Cyber Protests and Crime.’ *Harvard Journal Law & Technology*.
		- *The New York Times*: [What Is a ‘Hacktivist’](https://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/01/13/what-is-a-hacktivist/)?
	- **Activity-scale of Cyberterrorism**
	  Consult the [Global Terrorism Database](https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/), which provides information on domestic and international terrorist attacks around the world, including incidents from 1970-2019. Note the attacks facilitated or enabled by the internet.
- ### National Responses to Cyberterrorism
	- Responses to cyberterrorism vary from one country to another. Initiatives have been developed to counter cyberterrorism at various levels from the national through to regional, transnational and international.
	- CONTEST is The United Kingdom's [Strategy for Countering Terrorism](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/716907/140618_CCS207_CCS0218929798-1_CONTEST_3.0_WEB.pdf). The strategy includes four 'P' work strands:
		- **Prevent**: to stop people becoming terrorists or supporting terrorism.
		- **Pursue**: to stop terrorist attacks.
		- **Protect**: to strengthen our protection against a terrorist attack.
		- **Prepare**: to mitigate the impact of a terrorist attack.
	- The strategy states that "The threat from Islamist terrorism remains the foremost and most significant Extreme right-wing terrorism is a growing threat, and in 2016 we proscribed an extreme right-wing terrorist group, National Action, for the first time. Northern Ireland related terrorism remains a serious threat, particularly in Northern Ireland itself."
	- In the USA, Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT) Act of 2001 includes "any unauthorized access to a computer or network that:
		- Modifies or impairs to medical data;
		- Causes physical injury to a person;
		- Poses a threat to public health or safety,
		- Damages a computer used by a government entity in the administration of justice, national defense, or national security."
	- Read the following [article](https://www.zdnet.com/article/us-unveils-cryptocurrency-enforcement-framework-to-combat-terrorist-use/) on how a number of applications of blockchain technologies and cryptocurrency can be linked to organised crime outfits and terrorist activities. The [video](https://youtu.be/rFYmNoNzRyA) presents the American response to ISIS's use of the cyberspace for terrorist purposes.
- ### Global Responses to Cyberterrorism
	- **International Response**
	  Due to the global nature of threats posed by cyberterrorism, responses to it require transnational and international cooperation between stakeholders, including lawmakers and law enforcement agencies.
	- The EU, NATO, ((640dae06-a3a1-43d9-9e69-2506ae0bc6ff)) (OECD) and the UN have developed programmes and strategies to tackle cyberterrorism.
	- The following sources provide you with further details about national, regional and international responses to cyberterrorism:
		- Bogdanoski, M. and Petreski, D. (2013) [Cyber Terrorism - Global Security Threat](http://eprints.ugd.edu.mk/6849/1/CYBER%20TERRORISM%E2%80%93%20GLOBAL%20SECURITY%20THREAT%20-%20Mitko%20Bogdanoski.pdf), Contemporary Macedonian defence
		- The [UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy](https://www.un.org/counterterrorism/un-global-counter-terrorism-strategy) aims to address the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism and put in place preventative measures to combat terrorism.
		- The European Commission is putting a lot of pressure on technology firms and online services to stamp out terrorist and extremist content, such as videos, images and potentially live streams that promote or encourage extremism. Read: [EU considers 60-minute deadline for social networks to remove terrorist content](https://www.zdnet.com/article/eu-considers-60-minute-deadline-for-social-networks-to-remove-terrorist-content/)
		- [Counter-narratives: Extremely Together](https://www.kofiannanfoundation.org/topics/extremely-together/bjorn-ihler). See in particular the activities of the Norwegian Bjorn Ihler who survived the Anders Breivik terrorist attack. Ihler uses art and dialogue to counter extreme right wing narratives and to deconstruct their propaganda.
	- **Issues with Responses**
	  Chen et al. (2014) argue that "cyberterrorism...is not strictly a problem of cyber security as which it is sometimes portrayed.... preferred approach to its prevention and resolution emphasizes adaptiveness, intelligence sharing and education".
	- The Council of Europe's Concention on Cybercrime has made efforts to globalise cybercrime defences through the harmonisation of national laws, improving investigative abilities, and boosting international cooperation (Archick, 2006, pp. 1-3). The convention's efforts certainly contributed to raising international legal standards against cybercrime, although it was criticised for failing to have countries through which cyberattacks are often routed, such as North Korea, abiding by its mandates (Archick, 2006, p. 3).
	- Russia, China, India and Brazil also refused to sign by citing Article 32, which permits extraterritorial searches, as inappropriate (Chen, 2017). Absence of trust and coordination among nation states, and communication between public and private sectors to fight organised cyberterrorists, hinders effective responses to global threats posed by cyberterrorism.
	- The issues discussed in [[Week 5: National and International Cyber-Security Strategies]] in relation to effective implementation of national / international cybersecurity strategies are also relevant and applicable when it comes to discussing potential obstacles facing states in countering cyberterrorism.
	- **Essential Resources**
	  The following sources complement the discussion on issues with responses to cyberterrorism:
		- Online article: [Lack of industry collaboration spurs cyberterrorism](https://www.zdnet.com/article/lack-of-industry-collaboration-spurs-cyberterrorism/)
		- Tehrani, P. M., Manap, N. A. and Taji, H. (2013) Cyber terrorism challenges: The need for a global response to a multi-jurisdictional crime.
- ### Activities
	- Forum Activity [Google Docs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yC9su5YNPgu2T-iEmOW6sjPMjhn4Qqal8tgbm7Dgkm0/edit#)
	- Challenge Activity [Google Docs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1AjoJK8weAb2IMyK22Ij9r8hhkd5PZuVhZiHcaAWi62s/edit)